---
title: Erectile Dysfunction
layout: patient-conditions/erectile-dysfunction
metadata:
  title: Erectile Dysfunction
  description: While over 52% of American men suffer from some degree of erectile
    dysfunction, it is surprising to me how very little patients know about the
    causes and treatments for this disease
image: /static/img/erectile-dysfunction.jpg
---
While over 52% of American men suffer from some degree of erectile dysfunction, it is surprising to me how very little patients know about the causes and treatments for this disease. Erectile dysfunction can have a significant psychological impact on a man and can significantly impair his relationship with his partner. There are also cultural differences that dictate which men are more likely to seek treatment.    

There are many causes of erectile dysfunction. The most common causes are associated with diabetes and prostate cancer. Diabetics are much more likely to have ED because they tend to have poor blood flow and nerve function in their penis. Following prostate cancer surgery many men will develop ED. This can be a devastating consequence for a young men or men who are already very sexually active. Prostate cancer surgery results in some injury to the nerves that gives a man an erection and unfortunately some men never recover their erections after this surgery. Other causes of ED include smoking, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, and certain medications. Many patients don’t realize that beta blockers, one of the most commonly used blood pressure medications, can cause problems with erections. Other causes include psychological causes, such as seen with marital guilt, new relationships, and divorce. In these cases sex therapy is extremely effective. [Peyronie’s diseases](/patient-conditions/peyronies-disease), which is an abnormal curvature of the penis when it is erect, and penile trauma can also lead to ED. 

Erectile dysfunction is important because it is a window to a man’s cardiac and overall health. In fact the causes of ED and cardiovascular disease are very similar. The common causes include smoking, poor diet and lack of exercise, diabetes, obesity, advanced age, and elevated cholesterol levels. ED is one of the first signs of cardiovascular disease.   Studies have shown that from the day a man develops erectile dysfunction, he has a 15% chance of developing a heart attack or stroke in seven years.  This means that roughly 1 out of 7 men will have a cardiovascular event from the day they develop erectile dysfunction.  There is a reason for this and it all has to do with the diameter of a man’s arteries. Realize the penile arteries are some of the smallest arteries in a man’s body and they are roughly 1-2mm. The arteries in the heart are roughly 3-4mm and the arteries in your neck, or the carotid arteries, 5-6mm. Thus if you are to get blockage in your arteries, which arteries do you think are going to get blocked first?  It is the penile arteries. This is why it is more common for a man to have erectile dysfunction before he gets a heart attack and more common for him to have a heart attack before he has a stroke. This is called the “arterial diameter theory” and it makes sense.   

##  

Many people believe that Viagra is a good treatment for erectile dysfunction. However you have to ask yourself if Viagra, or Viagra-like drugs, are really curing the problem of erectile dysfunction. I believe that these medications are not curing ED but only allowing the disease to become worse over time. Many patients do not realize that ED is a disease process that is progressive and it is actually reversible.  Studies have shown that diet and exercise alone can reverse erectile dysfunction.  Other studies have shown that the use of statins alone not only improve erectile dysfunction but also make Viagra-like drugs much more effective.  Improving diabetic control and stopping smoking are also ways to reverse erectile dysfunction.  Finally, daily dosing of Viagra-like drugs, such as Cialis, and the use of testosterone have been shown to improve erectile function.     Over the past 5 years there has been significant utilization of regenerative therapies to treat ED. These therapies include shockwave therapy, stem cell therapy and the use of platelet rich plasma to treat ED. These therapies are still investigational and current clinical trials are underway at Baylor College of Medicine.

##  

One of the best ways to improve a man’s erections is to treat his partner. There have been many studies showing that if you increase a woman’s sexual desire, her male partner’s erections also significantly improve.   There are also studies showing that if you improve a man’s libido and erections, his partner’s libido and sexual function also improve. The reason for this is that sexual dysfunction in a couple’s disease. You should not treat one person without at least addressing the other partner. The best way to treat sexual dysfunction is to treat both partners together.  By treating one partner you are actually also treating the other.